---
title: POLI 110A, Second Essay
---

This is my second essay of POLI 110A, a class on political thoughts from ancient Greece to early Christianity. This essay is about Plato’s works discussed in class, in particular _Republic_. The prompt I choose from the three given by the professor, is:

> How can the form of a city and the form of a soul be linked? How does Plato link changes in the form or organization of a city with changes in the form or organization of the soul? Is Plato also implying that any change in the just city or soul always leads to injustice?

The reason I choose to make the essay public while working on it is to create a fake image of supervision as a way against my endless procrastination. A formal discussion on this motivation will probably be given next month.

~~Prior to November 25th, any comments or advices on this essay are not encouraged for academic integrity reasons.~~

----

In Book II of _Republic_, Socrates proposed that in order to find the justice of a man one should first find the justice of a whole city because the latter is larger and therefore easier to find. After finding a city’s justice, the rest effort lies at observing the similarity between a man and a city.[^368e]

Then, an ideal city is constructed by adding the necessary part step by step. First, a city requires ordinary men to farm, to craft, to maintain the material life inside the city[^369a – 371c]. Second, a city requires guardians to maintain its security from outside threats. The reason for separating guardians from craftsmen is that in an ideal city one citizen should only specialize in one field for maximum efficiency[^370c] and that warfare itself is a profession[^374b].

Next, Socrates said that such the city needs an overseer or ruler to preserve its constitution[^412a]. He discussed in depth the responsibility and eligibility of rulers. A ruler should be a judge who rules other souls with his own just soul[^409a]. An ideal ruler should be isolated from injustice during his childhood, or he could be easily deceived and become unjust[^409b]. Late in his life he should learn injustice to be able to deal with them properly, and since he had already built just models such unjust behaviors wouldn’t affect his own soul[^409c]. Rulers should be chosen from guardians, as, in spite their capability, they must devote themselves to the services of the whole city—as Socrates argued in Book I—and guardians are the one best at loving their city[^412c – d]. Hence, the three classes of an ideal city are created: rulers who are the best of guardians, auxiliaries who help the rulers to maintain the security and order of the city, and the rest craftsmen.

After establishing the three classes of a city, Socrates and his fellows discussed justice inside the city, which is each class concentrates on its own work[^433b]. Subsequently, he asserted that there exists three parts in a soul, each linked to a class in the city[^439a – 441c]. The lowest part, the appetitive part of a soul which drives a person to respond to thirst, hunger, the desire formoney and sex—“the so-called pleasures of the body”—is the craftsmen class of a city[^442b]. The intermediate one is the spirited part and is similar to the auxiliary guardians[^441e]. The highest part, corresponding to the ruler class, is the rational part of a soul, capable of rational calculation[^441e]. The spirited part is allied with the rational part. For example, when one's appetite is in contrary to his rational calculation—like reading _Republic_ versus going to parties—after repetitively forcing himself to do the “right” rational thing, one will often get very angry at himself[^440b].

The link between the form of an ideal state and the form of a just man as examined so far still seems to be a little vague: what is the specific role of each class of the city—or each part of a soul—plays in different situations? One way to look at this is through removing certain features of a class or even the class itself entirely, and see the corresponding _changes_. In Book VIII, Plato discusses changes in the organization of a city and their reflections in human beings. There are, according to his theories, four types of inferior cities[^544c]. From the least worse to the most worse, they are _timocracy_, _oligarchy_, _democracy, and tyranny_ respectively.

A city of _timocracy_, according to Socrates, is a city where rulers possess less wisdom[^547e] and the relationship between guardians and the craftsmen is more like master and slave rather than equal friendship[^547c]. Such decay is probably caused by a civil war started by some degraded rulers[^547b]. Rulers are no longer pure, which makes wise people fearful. Those not so wise guardians who should have been auxiliaries are chosen to lead, making the whole city more war-oriented and honor-seeking[^547d – e]. At the same time, the civil war introduces the idea of private properties to the guardians, so even though they are not permitted to make money in public, they will seek wealth in secret[^548b]. I believe the key change here is that _guardians now have desires accompanied by abandoning the total love of philosophy_. Regarding a human’s soul, one’s rational part is partially unified with his spirited part, though still maintaining absolute dominance over his appetite. The man will seek honor and victory, being rude to his subordinates while being obedient to his superiors[^548e – 549a]. This should exemplify the importance of rulers’ unquestionable love of philosophy as well as a person’s “zeal” for wisdom. I think the modern correspondence to a timocratic person would be those successful in different fields, like successful businessmen: they honor victory, maintains a good control to their desires—no procrastination for example—and are more “practical”.

Continuing decay leads to _oligarchy_. This is caused by the unchecked growth of the guardians’ power as well as their thirst for wealth[^550d]. There are actually no more difference between rulers and auxiliaries, only the rich and the poor, the ruling and the ruled. In terms of a man, it is a soul which is fully devoted to making money, or, putting into the modern world, material interests. The first fault of oligarchy is that everyone except the poor can become a ruler[^551c]. Everything except instant interest can become the goal of an oligarchic soul. Such a soul is _short-sighted_[^554a – b]. The second fault of oligarchy is the existence of a head-on conflict between the ruler and the ruled[^551d]. Translating this fault to desires in a human being, this says that such a person no longer has a full control over his desires and has to rely on self-correction over and over again.[^554c] I believe this shows the importance of a standalone ruling class, the separation between the rational part and the spirited part. Unlike a man of excellence or a timocratic person who fights for the wisdom or victory itself rather than their accompanying results, an oligarchic person seeks solely for the material interests. This change leads to the failure of building an “institution” of systematic control of one’s appetite, or as Plato said in the book, “such a man pays no attention to eduction”[^554b]. I believe oligarchy reflects the “soul”, or mental status, of average successful person.

While an oligarchy is wealth-oriented, a _democracy_ is much more diversified. There are no longer two different classes, and everyone—mostly the original craftsmen class—now have the freedom to do whatever they want to do[^557b]. The very idea of founding an ideal state—specialization—is now replaced by chaos and arbitrariness[^558b]. The corresponding changes in one’s soul makes this person surrounded by desires that are both necessary and redundant[^558e]. A man of this kind doesn’t have a very focused objective and pursue whichever desire comes into his mind[^561b], which is often called lack of self-discipline. In the other hand, such lifestyle is often envied by other people[^559e], providing that the person in question could figure out a way to ensure his material life quality.  The democracy constitution shows how the absence of guardians, or both the rational part as well as the spirited part, could impact a city or a person. Arbitrary desires now take over. I would say those unsuccessful man who shows a clear lack of self-control falls into this category.

The last one, _tyranny_, is quite similar to democracy from a certain point of view. The evolution is simple: the rich people are robbed by the rest majority[^564e – 565c] and a leader will be elected by the majority for the effective opposition of the rich, who are starting to strike back[^565d]. The tyranny’s power grows stronger and stronger and starts to purge all enemies including those who have previously supported him, especially those who are brave and well educated—the good citizens[^567c – d]. At one point, no one could no longer challenge his position, and relatively capable citizens have been purged. In the ninth book, Socrates provided a model for a tyrannic man to develop. Initially, both the moderate desires and the lawless ones are developed during the child’s imitation of others, particularly his parents[^572e]. However, with the help of bad companies the child gradually replaces these good desires with those crazy, “erotic” ones. This is a process like the rise of a tyrant, which, once started, can hardly be reverted[^573a – b]. To instantiate this model with some real world examples, one can think these bad desires as gaining wealth through theft or gaining pleasure through drugs. Once addicted, they can hardly be shaken off. As Socrates showed[^575b], one good example of tyrannic people is criminals.

Clearly, Plato implied that any change to the just city leads to injustice, as shown by the usage of words like “decay”[^546a]. In Book IV, Plato already defined “justice” as everyone doing his own work, as mentioned above[^433b]. Translated into the context of human souls, this says justice is and only is the mental state that one is guided by his rational part allied with the spirited part and has a tame appetitive part. Each change in the form of city mentioned above pulls one class from what it is best at and therefore disturb the order of a city, which leads to injustice in a city. Similarly, each change in the organization of soul disorders the soul itself, which also results in injustice.

There exists a head-on conflict between the guardian